while Israel continues its Relentless
war on Gaza Palestinians pin the hopes
on talks which have paused in Doha
before resuming in Cairo on Thursday
Israel and Hamas are studying proposals
from mediators Qatar Egypt and the us
but what are the chances of Peace this
time this is Inside Story
hello welcome to the program I am Hashim
AAL a pausing talks for a ceasefire in
Gaza but no pausing attacks from Israel
18 people from one family among the
latest victims killed by air strike the
war has now killed 40,000 Palestinians
with many others dead under
oh hopes for a ceasefire rest on Talks
brokered by Qatar Egypt and the US
Israel's biggest donor and weapon
supplier after Israel began its war in
October it took five months during which
32,000 Palestinians were killed before
the US and EU finally called for a
ceasefire at the end of March since then
Israel has ignored a un Security Council
vote but International pressure to end
this war is intensifying the horrors for
gaza's people continue daily while the
nightmare of Israelis whose loved ones
are held captive in Gaza goes on too so
what could make or break these talks is
there a real Prospect of Peace this time
we put there to Our Guest shortly first
OMS sh has this
report in the 10 months since the
Israeli military launched its war on
Gaza it killed more than 40,000
Palestinians wiping out % of the strip's
population and flattening most of its
homes and
buildings for those who are surviving
it's a battle against hunger disease and
for basic human
dignity the plight of the Palestinians
has led to Global calls for a ceasefire
but for months now International
mediators have not been able to agree on
one now US president Joe Biden says an
agreement is closer than ever after the
latest round of talks in K's Capital
Doha further discussions to end the war
will be held in Cairo next week I'm
optimistic not far from over just a
couple more ises I think we got a shot
are you more optimistic now than you
have been in months past yes
why I told you that I give away what's
going on when would the ceasefire begin
if you can get a deal
That Remains the Same the US Egypt andq
say the latest proposal Bridges
remaining gaps between Hamas and Israel
mediators have been seeking to finalize
details of a framework initially
outlined by President Biden in May which
he said Israel had proposed Israeli
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu called
on mediators to pressure Hamas to accept
the plan Hamas has rejected what it
called new conditions from Israel in the
latest draft dozens of rounds of
indirect talks between Hamas and Israel
have failed to reach a deal Netanyahu
has said that uh he has no plans to end
the war anytime soon um and that as soon
as the hostages are released he'll go
back to fighting and that Hamas uh wants
a permanent end to the hostilities uh
and an end to the Israeli presence in
the Gaza Strip so that is a very
fundamental thing that has not been
bridged at all and we don't know how um
that is going to be overcome in this new
deal on the ground Israeli strikes have
continued in Gaza killing more
Palestinians on Friday the Israeli
military issued orders to forcibly
displace people in Central and Southern
areas previously designated as so-called
safe zones Israel's war on Gaza is also
fueling instability with fears of a
wider Regional
War mulsum Sharif Al jazer for Inside
Story let's take a closer look at the SE
fire proposal that's been discussed the
first phase would be a temporary truce
during which Hamas would release women
the elderly and wounded captives in
exchange for Palestinians held in
Israeli prisons the second phase would
include a permanent end to the
hostilities and the release of all
remaining Israeli captives and the third
phase would be the reconstruction of
Gaza and the return of the remains of
any deceased captives to
Israel let's bring in our guests in Tel
Aviv we have Alan pinkas former Israeli
Ambassador and previous government
advisor in Boston Rami huri
distinguished fellow at the American
University of Beirut and in Washington
DC Nile stanage White House colonist for
the publication of the Hill welcome to
the program Alan do you genuinely
believe believe that a breakthrough is
still possible in the Talks brokered by
the Americans the Egyptians and the
qataris uh no Hashem unfortunately I
don't um I am not
optimistic at all I look at the
fundamentals of the deal this is a deal
that could have been done six months ago
or four months ago or two months ago or
two weeks ago and it still hasn't
happened and it hasn't happened for a
reason it did not happen because Israel
doesn't want the deal and it appears
that Hamas is not interested in the deal
in fact the one thing that Hamas and
Israel have in common right now is that
they don't want the deal now let me add
one more thing um in in the graphics
that you uh displayed a moment ago Hasen
describing the deal uh there are two
things that are missing in the first
phase there's also a 42 day six week um
ceas fire that's Mr netanyahu's problem
with it now the second thing leads to me
being uh pessimistic about this is that
in that plan this is this has nothing to
do with your graphics this has to do
with Biden uh President Biden presenting
the plan which parenthetically was an
Israeli plan um there is absolutely no
mention to post war Gaza political
governance postwar so-called the day
after uh Power vacuum uh in Gaza so that
leads me to uh
um very very little optimism if at all
all right Ramy let's break down the the
the the the very structure of the of the
of the deal itself so it was the based
on the same idea that was presented by
President Biden in May Hamas came in
July the 2nd and said they they go ahead
with the with with with the with the
agreement which is based on three phases
phase one six weeks phase two six weeks
phase two three six weeks except that
Hamas came out yesterday and
said we don't believe there's going to
be a deal because the Israelis are not
genuine about deal number two they say
if there is no permanent ceasefire
complete withdrawal of Israeli soldiers
complete exchange of prisoners and the
right of people to return back to their
homes in the north we're not going to
commit ourselves to any agreement is
this something that could undermine any
chances for a potential agreement
there's very little chance of a real
permanent comprehensive agreement
because I think fundamentally what the
Americans and the Israelis call an
agreement is very different from what
the Palestinians and most of the rest of
the world calls an agreement the
Israelis and Americans basically want to
perpetuate direct or indirect Israeli
control over all of Palestine security
control economic uh issues and things
like that demographic issues uh so it's
very difficult to talk about this
agreeing you might have short-term
agreements about a cessation of fire
exchange of prisoners and uh hostages
that is likely to to happen
uh and the Israelis getting out of most
of Gaza the Israelis want to stay in
part of Gaza and the Palestinians saying
no you have to get out all the way it's
fascinating we hear Less Talk these days
of the Israelis saying well after the
fighting ends and we move out we need to
maintain our ability to control what
goes on and who governs Gaza and
security issues uh that's probably being
discussed as well but it's being pushed
down the road so the chances of a real
breakthrough are pretty slim but the
fact that they're still trying is
significant n the fact that they still
uh trying to continue the talks they
will meet in Egypt could this be an
indication that they are willing to
overcome some of the sticking points
particularly when the Israelis are
saying that we need to have some sort of
control over the Philadelphia Corridor
but at the same time would like to
maintain checkpoints in narim uh the
narim junction particular to ensure that
those who will be able to return back to
their homes in the North have to be
screened for the potential of carrying
weapons to the north it could but that
doesn't necessarily mean it will be that
I think as your previous guests have
indicated the really big overarching
question here is are these negotiations
taking place in good faith in the hope
of reaching a deal or are they really a
shell game that is intended just to buy
time and that won't change anything in a
fundamental sense so issues like the
Corridor for example yes maybe there is
movement on that if you assume that both
sides are interested in a peace deal I
personally think yes there'll be
eventually there has the fighting has to
stop somehow but I am not persuaded that
Mr Netanyahu in particular is interested
in a peace deal right now for various
reasons including his own relative lack
of popularity in Israel the likelihood
that there would be inquiries into the
security failure of of October the 7th
and the fact that he himself is H has
engaged in this rhetoric of total
Victory I notice he's been criticized by
the Israeli defense minister yov Galant
for that because total Victory is one of
those terms that can be expanded
endlessly if you want to uh create a
rationale to continue a war so I think
those are the kind of factors that
undercut any belief that this is really
a good faith negotiation Alan if a deal
takes place is it good news for
Netanyahu could it be his opportunities
to somehow outmaneuver the far right
come back to his people and say listen
I've killed Han I've killed uh shuker
who's the top military commander ofah
and I have the deal and I have the
captives back home could it be a good
news for
him no hypothetically yes but practic
practically I'm sorry for the reasons
that Niles just uh enumerated uh it's
going to be bad news
because Mr netan is going to face not
just uh demonstrations and protest in
Israel he's also facing a criminal trial
his Coalition is fragile he is seen as
responsible and the main culprit for the
the bacle of October 7th in the Hamas
terror attack um in consistent polls
7070 70% want him to resign um over 70%
see him directly responsible therefore
he needs to be held accountable
something by the way which he hasn't
done until now now the war the
prolonging the extend the extending of
the war extension rather of the war
enables him to distance himself from
October 7 and and feeds into his um wild
U alternative narrative According to
which this wasn't just a Hamas terror
attack this is a civilizational war it's
a multi front War Iran is at the uh uh
Center of of this uh Coalition that's
fighting against Israel on the other
hand the world is trying to superimpose
a Palestinian state which is nonsense no
one can impose anything on anyone
certainly not at this stage and so for
him he needs the war to go on and you
know
hypothetically I take the premise here I
take the premise of your question or
remark rather ham uh U hypothetically
this is exactly what he should do he
should say I was let down by the
military I I I did what I needed to do I
stood up to world uh pressures I even
stood up to the American president I
killed whoever needed to be killed in is
hania and so on um we have exhausted the
usefulness of any military operation in
in Gaza now let's stop and do some uh um
recalibration but that would assum a
level of rationality of a decision maker
that Mr n just does not have Ramy the
deal is yet to be Inked if ever it gets
a chance to be ined in the future in the
meantime if Iran and hisbah decide to
retaliate against the killing of fad
shukar and is Hanah would that change
the
Dynamics perhaps uh but that again a
limited short-term issue I think the
problem with all of these discussions
about peace agreements and ceasefires
and the day after is that they tend to
zero in on today tomorrow and yesterday
they don't look at the bigger issue um
alone gave a series of very good reasons
why he's pessimistic but I think there's
a deeper reason that the world has to
come to grips with and Israel in
particular and the Jewish people have to
come to groups with which is the nature
of Zionism and this is really a big
sticker item it's not going to be
resolved in a peace process because as
all of this stuff is happening with Iran
and hisbah and Hamas and Gaza you have
the settlers in the West Bank burning
Villages and and burning people in their
cars and this government of Israel and
the Army is protecting them so you still
have the late 19th century Zionist
settler Colonial uh process continuing
physically taking over homes and in
Jerusalem and and and the West Bank and
other places and trying to drive out the
Palestinians and in Gaza and in the West
Bank unless Zionism is defined and
contained in a way that satisfies the
Israeli desire for their own Jewish
state which is a reasonable desire but
it's not reasonable if they put the
state on my land and the Palestinian
land that's forcibly taken from us so
that has to really that's the big a big
long-term issue uh in the short term of
course Iran andah and before that Saddam
Hussein these were all issues that came
up but they tend to hide the bigger
challenge that all of us face n
President Biden said that we closer than
we've ever been uh as far as the deal is
concerned what kind of Leverage The
Americans still have when it comes to
bring narrowing the differences between
Hamas and
Israel well they have enormous leverage
but the question is will they use it I
mean you mentioned in your introduction
about the degree to which the United
States has underwritten Israel's effort
both politically and diplomatically and
militarily we just recently had the
announcement of approximately another $2
billion in armed sales to Israel so
there is leverage there but whether it
will be used is the bigger question we
are just a couple of days away here in
the US from the opening of the
Democratic National Convention which is
expected to attract thousands of pro
Palestinian demonstrators objecting to
uh President Biden and by extension by
vice president Harris's commitment which
they have described as Ironclad to
Israel President Biden has paused only
one armed shipment throughout the past
10 months now that's a whole other
conversation in one way there's some
suggestion that vice president Harris
has been at least rhetorically a little
more sympathetic to the suffering of the
Palestinians and has said that she will
not be silent about it but to get back
to your question the United States has
leverage it has less willingness to it
it seems to me Alan there are many many
questions that need to be answered uh
particularly the one about what's next
which
you've talked about earlier in your
first answer what's next for Gaza we
know that the Americans the israelies
the EU and many countries in the Gulf
region are looking forward to new
architecture in the region without Hamas
in Gaza do you see this as something
that could potentially happen in the
near future if Hamas continues as a
strong military
faction no well Hamas is not a strong
military faction right now but what it
does have is residual political power um
amongst other reasons because Israel
rejected and is reluctant to entertain
any ideas about a post-war Gaza uh um
and and about the Palestinian Authority
extending governance to Gaza which by
the way is the exact reason why Mr netan
worked so hard to strengthen Hamas um
and if you look at it from a um you know
from a broader perspective uh Hamas may
be the Palestinians tragedy but
Netanyahu is equally Israel's tragedy
and the combination of those two and the
combination of those two um does not
lend a lot of credits to any ideas of a
uh of a settlement now there is one
thing though that you know it it sort of
came up uh uh throughout this
conversation between the four of us you
know there's one thing I look at this
after Decades of being involved in these
talks and observing them from the
outside you reach the following
conclusion the one thing that the
Palestinians and Israelis have in common
is that they um
repeatedly um agree to blame America
it's always America's fault the
president wasn't involved enough the
president was too involved the Secretary
of State didn't come here often enough
he came here too frequently there comes
a point where it is it really is our
problem it's us and the
Palestinians um and and this this needs
to be resolved without pointing fingers
at a certain president or a certain
Secretary of State and I'm talking about
the last 40 years not about the last 10
months I me could it be that because
Hamas understands very well that any
future for Gaza where they won't have a
say means that if they decide to put
their signature on this agreement for
the ceasefire it would be the biggest
mistake they are ever to commit in that
since they were established and this
explains why they are very skeptical
about this whole
talks I wouldn't go that far you know
there's too much emphasis on Hamas
itself you don't want to destroy it you
want to keep it out of any future
government you want to do this you want
to do
that you know before hamash became
powerful there was fat there was the PLO
as a whole
um there were other movements and they
come and go it's important to understand
hamas's relevance is not the arms it has
or its position today or who leads it
its importance and its power and its
legitimacy come from the fact that it
reflects widely in its political aims
not necessarily its means but its
political aims the sentiments of the
overwhelming majority of Palestinians
and Arabs in terms of Palestinian
national rights and the overwhelming
majority of global public opinion in
terms of implementing International laws
and legitimacy and un resolutions
related to Israel and Palestine that's
why it's powerful and and and it does
what uh it does they don't particularly
they didn't want to run Gaza they could
have run Gaza years ago they didn't want
to they ran an election they won in
2006 uh and then the US and Israel
boycotted them and they eventually had
to take over uh so I would I would look
at the bigger picture why is Hamas still
there because it reflects widespread
Palestinian national goals those
National goals include repeated offers
to Israel to coexist uh in peace um in a
mechanism that gives the Israelis their
National rights and the Palestinians
their National rights the Israelis and
Americans have consistently refused to
respond to at least a dozen uh overtures
from Hamas the Palestinian national
movement to do this um and so this is
why I got back to the issue we've got to
this what is what is Israel what is
Zionism what are its legal borders its
physical borders and its demographic uh
borders and this is why most people
today are so skeptical of the Israeli
and the American uh positions and so
it's a very it's a big problem but it
has resolutions if courageous enough to
get to the course NY when you look at
the phase three which talks about a
phase of perhaps 6 weeks that would then
Usher in a new era that could continue
for like from three to five years with
the Reconstruction of Gaza but here is
here is a problem with this particular
phase and here is where we don't have
any sense of clarity who takes over Gaza
who's going to police Gaza are we going
to have a Palestinian Authority
rejuvenated reinvigorated to take over
is going to be Saudis having much bigger
say and the ities than ever
before unless you get a sense of clarity
how can you put together an agreement
that could just collapse in six seven
months from now well yes I I agree with
that I think that is a completely valid
question the other thing is how would a
uh authority of whatever kind imposed by
or with the acquiescence of Israel have
any moral legitimacy with the people of
Gaza who have been killed in very large
number have had enormous suffering
visited upon them it seems to me that
almost any Authority that was uh imposed
in that way would struggle mly the other
point is just briefly if I may before we
get to phase three we have to get
through phase two where President Biden
has said there could be a permanent
cessation of hostilities so long and
these are his words as Hamas lives up to
its responsibilities the direct
implication there is there could be a
permanent ation while hamamass is in
existence I no evidence that Mr
Netanyahu accepts that at all he
continues to to talk about the
elimination ofas as we're near the end
of the program I appreciate you can give
me some short answers let me start with
Alan Alan if there's no agreement War
continues what would be the reaction of
the public in Israel is it fair to say
that because the majority of Israelis
support the war therefore there's
absolutely no problem for them as far as
the war continuing for as long as it
takes no not no no no not at all they
they support the war and they justify
the war in response to what had happened
um on October 7th in the Savage Hamas um
attack that doesn't mean they like what
they're seeing that doesn't mean they
understand why it's taking 10 months
they that does not mean that they see
any tangible achievements um now per
your questions and you asked me to be
brief about this um if the war goes on
there is a good chance or good
likelihood that it would escalate I mean
there there seems to be a case of
connecting vessels here between Lebanon
and and Gaza uh the Americans know this
that explains some of their involvement
the the idea to that the Paramount
interest not idea the Paramount interest
of preventing escalation now if there is
no deal and the Americans are um
convinced that it was Mr netan who
undermined it who uh uh made sure it
would happen who derail a last minute
opportunity I think that un unlike uh um
what they have done in the last 10
months uh they will stand up and rebuke
him harshly if that happens you will see
Mass demonstrations in itel but you will
also see um major opposition coming from
the uh Security Branch of the
intelligence branches the security
branches and the military itself so uh
this is very bad Mr There's No Deal uh
arami are we closer than ever to a wider
military confrontation in this part of
the
world um we've had wider confrontations
in this region over the years and uh
they come and go but the fear now is
that this if there is a regional war
with Iran and hisbah and the US and
others that this would be bigger scale
causing much more damage than ever
partly because of the nature of the
Weaponry that's uh available but mainly
because there's a whole new reality of
geostrategic balance the Israel is not
fighting the army of Syria and Egypt and
Jordan as it used to do before it's
fighting this new uh constellation of
mostly Shiite some Sunni Arab forces
mostly some Iranians uh that have
created this tremendous new powerful
force uh the so-called axis of
resistance and Israel knows the
capabilities of these groups and
the US and Israel together have and and
and the UK have been trying to stop
thear the huis and Yemen from ship
attacking ships and and they can't stop
them they keep doing it so that's the
big big question if how do you how do
you uh neutralize that fear and the only
is to have a ceasefire and a peace
agreement very briefly n if you mind how
how do you see Gaza playing out in the
US
elections it splits the Democratic party
I was going to say say up the middle in
fact the majority of the democratic base
is now sympathetic to the Palestinians
that is not reflected in Democratic
elected officials and the danger is that
that could sap H Democratic enthusiasm
and turnout particularly in some key
States like Michigan which has a very
high Arab American population gentlemen
I really appreciate your Insight
Al Stanish thank you very much indeed
looking forward to talking to you in the
near future and thank you too for
watching you can see the prog again
anytime by visiting our website al.com
for further discussion go to our
Facebook page that's
facebook.com/ AJ Inside Story you can
also join the conversation on X our
handle is AJ inside story from hash and
the entire team here in DOA bye for
[Music]
now make sure to subscribe to our
Channel to get the latest news from Al
jazer